The year was 1525.
There was one official church.
All religious writings and
ceremonies were in Latin,
a language not understood by
most of the people.
The translation and
distribution of the Bible in
English
had been outlawed;
a crime punishable by death.
Driven by the idea that God
meant all people
to understand His word plainly,
some men risked their lives and
worked tirelessly
to translate the Bible into the
common language.
Such a man was...
William Tyndale.
William! We are discovered!
What? How?
I've made arrangements for the
next ship!
We must leave!
The Old Testament translations!
Not one note must be left
behind!
Make haste!
Follow me!
I want anyone caught in
possession of these books
to be arrested and tried... for
heresy!
Burn every book, every page,
every piece of paper
that has so much as a remnant
of it!
William Tyndale...
I shall have my way with you...
wherever you might be!
ta npobata ta elia...
...speech...no...voice!
And I recognize... No! Not
recognize.
And I - Yes! My sheep...
hear...my voice...
Finished!
Good! Our dinner guest will be
here shortly...
and Lady Ann and I would like
you to join us.
Sir John! Come in, come in!
I see our children's tutor
is hard at work during his
spare time.
Now, tell me...what did you
finish during these hours?
A Gospel?
Would that were the case!
But...no, I just finished
translating one more sentence.
I see!
It is Scripture.
It must be done just right!
"My sheep hear my voice
and I know them and they follow
me."
Surely, Sir John...
we are to understand as well as
hear!
Surely the common people...
I know - "They must have the
Scriptures!"
Yes! ln English and not just
Latin.
I suppose you will tell me to
be cautious.
I admire your courage,
William...
and your knowledge
which is why I have asked you
to tutor my children.
But you must not forget that
teaching the Scriptures
in English among the people is
against the law.
You are a scholar and as a
study in languages,
this translation is acceptable-
but...outside of this room...
well -
these are most uncertain times.
You will recall what happened
in Coventry...
...and so rains came...
and the waves rose....
high, high, high...
but the wise man's house stood
strong!
But the foolish man did not do
as Jesus told him...
and so when the storm blew,
the foolish man's house came
down...
PLUNK!!!
Tell us another, father!
Oh...please! Just one...one
more!
Oh...mother says it's off to
bed with you!
Now...let's gather round and
ask God's blessing.
Peter, head bowed! Good boy!
Our Father in heaven, Hallowed
be Thy Name,
May Thy Kingdom come, Thy will
be done,
upon this earth as it is in...
Your activities have been
reported!
By the authority of the holy
mother church
you are hereby arrested for the
offense of reciting and teaching
the Lord's Prayer in the
English language
and for this crime...
you shall be punished by
death...
No! John!
and burned at the stake.
Father!... Leave him alone!...
Stop!
Richard- no!
No! John!
So it is with anyone
caught circulating the
Scriptures in English -
trial by fire!
And so light must be brought by
one means or another, Sir John.
The word of God is a light unto
our path.
It is for all the people to
understand
and not for the church only.
Come now...our dinner guest is
waiting.
I repeat...
it is the church which has the
authority
to interpret Sacred Scriptures,
and not the commoners!
Yet Christ saw fit to teach the
common people, your Grace.
True! He has a point!
A point which will prick him.
And?...
And Christ said, the Counselor,
the Holy Spirit,
He will teach you all things.
And so He does...
through the church and its
interpretation!
You're a scholar.
An expert in... five languages?
Eight!
Precisely!
Think of the preparation you
have had
to understand Scripture-
To translate it.
The Holy Spirit helps each
person to understand it
in a way that helps him to
follow God.
Andrew!
Sir?
"non te deseram neque
derelinquam"
I...beg your pardon, sir?
Did you know that Jesus said:
"I will always be with you;
I will never leave you!"
Really, sir?
That's wonderful!
I shall remember that, when I
miss my father.
For heaven's sake! He's a child!
You know very well that Christ
spoke in parables
difficult to understand... not
in common, plain talk!
"Woe to you, teachers of the
law,
for you shut the kingdom of
heaven in men's faces.
You yourselves do not enter,
nor will you let those enter
who are trying to."
How plain a Word is that?
William!
Forgive me, Lady Ann but it is
important
to remember that the New
Testament
was written in the Greek
language, the "Koine"-
the language of the common
people...
I cannot see how we can take it
upon ourselves
to withhold something that God
has so freely and intentionally
given to us all.
Regardless of whether we judge
anyone to be a simpleton or not.
Every person is the object
of Christ's affection and
sacrifice.
I - I believe our lively
discussion has...
Ended!
You may think yourself a bright
scholar
but you are young and you are
inexperienced!
If your reckless behavior is
any indication of what would
happen
should the Word of God get into
the wrong hands...
...then we were better without
God's Word than the Church's!
And Sir...
The Bible states "The grass
withers, the flower fades,
but the word of our God stands
forever."
If God spare my life, I will
cause a ploughboy
to know more scripture than the
average priest!
Oh, William!
If God spare your life!
Tread carefully, Master
Tyndale...
the fire is never far... from a
heretic!
Sir John, Lady Ann...
your hospitality as usual is
most gratifying.
Your choice of house guests, I
regret,
is another matter entirely.
Good evening.
I fear I have ruined your
dinner!
Ha! You have ruined his!
And I enjoyed every minute of
it!
Though I do agree with the
Archdeacon, William.
You should be careful.
Should? You must!
There must be a way to work out
William's vision
within the Church and thus
avoid danger.
Would there be a way-
though judging by this evening,
I doubt it.
Well, I don't.
Might I suggest a gentleman
known for his love
of the Scriptures
as well as his good standing
within the church...
Doctor Latimer is his name
and I believe a gentleman of
good counsel.
I shall be glad to speak to him
on your behalf.
And so you see my dilemma, Dr.
Latimer!
In my heart...
I know that God wants all
people everywhere
to hear his words plainly,
and to understand them, but the
church denies me
the right to make it so...
yet...
oh sir, there seems no way...
But there is a way!
The King?
Perhaps...
but...there is yet another step
we can take.
The Bishop of London!
He has the authority to
commission a Bible translation?
Yes, and sponsor you as you do
it!
That is, if he is willing!
Oh, sir!
Lady Ann has contacts in London
to make the needed arrangements
for your move.
Move?
but..leave...leave Sir
John and Lady Ann?
I’m responsible for tutoring
their children, I couldn't-
And why not?
ls not your vision worth the
cost?
Listen to me William...
if you are to pursue this
vision of yours,
you'd do best to prepare for
greater hardships than that!
And everyone that has forsaken
houses or brethren or lands...
for My sake and the Gospel's
shall receive a hundredfold...
Then London it is!
Perhaps God is opening a door!
Well...?
...that bad, eh?
Now, William... it's not all
that bad is it?
How say you?
I have been here a full month!
I finally get an appointment to
see My Lord the Bishop
and his answer is...
No?
Oh Will, what is the use!
I have knocked on doors, I have
begged and pleaded,
I have pursued every means to
gain the consent of the Church,
but every door it seems has
been slammed in my face.
So then... what will you do?
If I cannot do God's work with
the Church's permission...
then I shall do God's work
without it!
Sir Monmouth!
Aaauuuggghhh!
Ah, William!
You startled me!
For a moment there I thought
you were-
Oh never mind!
It's good to see you!
How was your meeting with the
Bishop?
Not as I had expected.
Which is why I have come to see
you.
Do you suppose we might have a
word in private?
So that is how the books are
brought in!
Sermons from Luther in sacks of
fruit!
Fruit for the stomach and food
for the soul! Ha!
But no Bibles!
No! Not in English, no!
And they can't be printed in
England!
Not with Wolsey's threat of
burning!
No, no!
Then I shall have to go as far
from Wolsey's heat as possible.
Hmmm?
Germany!
Germany!?
You print and smuggle books
in....
why can't you smuggle a
slightly larger parcel out?
You mean y-...?
Then you best say goodbye to
England forever!
You will be a hunted fugitive
William -
The church will not stand for
it...
and you know they will persuade
the King
to help them track you down.
It will be a great price to pay.
Not any greater than the Lord's
sacrifice for us.
I am ready!
With very little money Tyndale
labored tirelessly
and continued work on the
translation
of the 27 books of the New
Testament
which he had begun earlier.
Once in Germany,
Tyndale's New Testament was
printed in secret
and the small pocket-sized
books were smuggled into
England.
I want anyone caught in
possession of these books
to be arrested and tried... for
heresy!
The New Testament copies
quickly spread
causing joy among the people
and alarm among the Church
leaders
who reacted by writing against
Tyndale
and denouncing his New
Testament translation
as filled with errors.
Reluctantly, William stopped
his translation work
to reply to his critics and
wrote a book entitled
"The Obedience of the Christian
Man".
Burn every book, every page,
every piece of paper
that has so much as a remnant
of it!
William Tyndale...I shall have
my way with you...
wherever you might be!
"...And God called to him from
within the bush,
'Moses! Moses!'
And Moses said, 'Here I am."'
A wonderful print job, Herr
Peter!
We shall soon have a goodly
part of the Old Testament
completed!
And that page will be printed
tonight, as usual,
but for now...
it is best kept hidden and away
from prying eyes.
We may have certain freedoms
here in Germany
but there are many still
powerful people
opposed to these works.
Dedrick!
Now please! Off you go!
You to your writing and I to my
printing!
Wer A sagt, muss auch sagen!
You must finish what you start!
God save you and good day, Herr
Quentel!
Your pardon, sir.
After you, please.
Good afternoon, Herr Quentel!
Good afternoon, Herr Cochlaeus!
I will be with you shortly...
Hmmmm?
Ah! Hmmmm?
Excuse me, sir!
And how is my work coming along?
It is done, Herr Cochlaeus!
Wunderbol!
Then this calls for a
celebration, does it not?
Will you join us Herr Quentel?
It is nearly your closing time!
Not tonight, danke!
I uh... have work to attend to.
But you go along and enjoy
yourselves!
Then we shall drink to your
good work!
...toast!
Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha...
Ahhhh...
ha ha ha...
That is good beer! Gladdens the
heart!
And loosens the tongue...
Now, then...tell me...
About this mysterious book that
you are printing...
(drunk) Ahhh... you mean... the
English Bible...
William! We are discovered!
What? How?
Herr Cochlaeus, one of the
printer's clients-
a very influential man with
strong ties to the Church...
somehow he found out!
The magistrates' soldier's are
at the print shop now.
William, it's just a matter of
moments before they come here!
I've made arrangements for the
next ship!
We must leave!
The Old Testament translations!
Not one note must be left
behind!
This way!
A name printer!
Give me his name!
I...uh...am not sure... your
honor!
You illegally print the
Scriptures in English
for someone whose name you do
not recall?
I...uh...
Peter Quentel! You have lost
your business...
will you also lose your life
and burn as a heretic?
Give me...a name!
Quickly!
Thank you!
His name is William Tyndale.
Aaauuuggghhh!
Find Tyndale! Find that heretic!
Find William Tyndale!
What now?
To a safer harbor, my friend...
...and to finish the work
that God has set before us...
come what may.
But for now... a good night's
rest!
I've had enough excitement for
one day.
Gone!
All the Old Testament
manuscripts...
the translations... we've lost
it all.
...but we are yet alive!
The Lord will sustain us!
The...Lord...will...
sustain...us!
"The Obedience of the Christian
Man" -
a prohibited book!
This is heresy and could very
well cost you your life!
How did you come about this?
I am the one to blame, your
Highness.
You, Lady Ann?
Whew!
And what have you to do with a
book of this nature, my dear?
Having heard so much about it,
my lord...
I did my very best to obtain a
copy.
My maid, who reads to me...
kept it in her possession...
and in a spirit of playfulness
her acquaintance...
took it from her...
only to be caught with it!
Ahhh, so you truly are the
culprit.
Indeed, my lord.
Yet I found its reasoning quite
remarkable.
For instance?
"God does not hold kings
subservient to the Church
for they are a God-appointed
office in themselves."
Ah... He has his wits about him!
The Bishops are indeed a thorn
in our flesh
and we could use a man that
isn't afraid to speak his mind,
this...William Tyndale!
Then your highness must also
offer him pardon,
for as his writings are
prohibited,
it is my understanding that he
lives a fugitive...
somewhere on the continent, I
believe.
Then we shall offer him safe
conduct
and a way to be of use to his
king.
Bring him to me!
Come now... let us walk
together.
So you finally found him.
Yes your majesty.
I have found Master Tyndale.
Or should I say, he found me?
Oh?
In Belgium your Majesty.
I was led to him just outside
the city of Antwerp
where he was waiting for me.
I put forth your gracious offer
of safe conduct
and to be part of your court.
He, uh...was reluctant, your
grace.
Reluctant?!
Thinking he feared for his life,
I assured him of your kind
intention my Lord,
and of the death of Cardinal
Thomas Wolsey...
however, it seems I was mistaken
to think he was concerned for
his own safety.
He spoke of a continual
persecution of the reformers,
and ahhh...He...
he handed me a letter for your
Majesty.
"If it would stand with the
king's most gracious pleasure
"to grant that only a small
portion of scripture
"may be distributed among his
people,
"whosoever's translation it may
be,
"I will immediately make a
faithful promise
"not to write more and to
return to England,
"offering my body to suffer
whatever punishment necessary,
even death."
He refuses our gracious
request...
and gives us a condition to his
return?
A condition?
This troublemaker?
To me?
If I allow the Scriptures to be
distributed then he will return!
It is clear, your majesty that
you either , uh...
submit to Tyndale and print his
...uh "scriptures" or,
as he threatens, he will
continue to cause havoc
among the people through his
writings.
He threatens the Church and
now...
it seems he dares to threaten
you!
My Lord, I don't think he -
He dares to threaten me?
Your Majesty...I don't -
A threat indeed!
I want him found and arrested!
Anyone, anyone in possession of
his writings
will be hanged or burned...
without exception!
As persecution mounted in
England,
William continued to write,
encouraging sincere Christians
to stand firm for their faith.
"Do not fear men that threaten
you
"but trust God who is able to
make good on his promise.
"Your cause is the Gospel,
"a light that must be fed with
the blood of our testimony
so that the light of the Gospel
will not go out."
I will not have these writings
stir up confusion
and discontent among the people.
The man must be stopped.
You will not return to this
place
until you have found and
apprehended this open wound,
William Tyndale.
Your grace.
The Poyntz family has been kind
enough to support me
as I translate.
They are truly a godsend and I
have no doubt
they will welcome you to supper.
William! Just in time for
supper!
And a good one I might add.
And I do hope you don't mind
but I have brought along a new
friend.
William, you must be careful.
Not to worry, he's an honest
gentleman.
Thomas Poyntz...
Henry Phillips!
It is truly a pleasure!
...and so you see, Henry,
just as the Apostle Paul
clearly expressed himself
to the early church in the
language of his day
so we must have the scriptures
in the common language today,
else how can the followers heed
the leader-
I have learned much from you
William.
And I from you.
Ha - would that be true!
In any case, it is time I repay
you, however humbly!
Come!
Join me for a meal and let us
talk more!
Ah! Two things I can never
decline!
Wonderful... after you!
... and further I might add
that Peter said,
"As newly born babes, desire
the milk of the Word..."
The Holy scriptures for babes,
for the unlearned -
William Tyndale!
What?
Run Henry! Quickly, Henry. This
way!
William!
Which way? Which-
William...William...
William!
William Tyndale! You are under
arrest.
Oh!
I shall have to have that
meal...all by myself.
Wha-?
Henry?
Farewell, William.
It's been... shall we
say...captivating?
William Tyndale you are under
arrest.
I am commanded to take you
henceforth from this place
to Vivorde Castle.
You stand accused of heresy-
teaching what is against mother
church.
I have neither written nor
taught anything
contrary to the Holy Scriptures.
You break the laws of our
Church.
Only when the Church breaks the
laws of God!
So, you set yourself above the
authority of the Church?
By God's grace, I am a servant
of the Church...
insomuch as the Church serves
God.
By your interpretation.
By plain understanding of the
holy scriptures.
Your writings are smuggled into
the hands
of the common people-
the Holy word of God in common
language.
If the people seek the
Scriptures
it is only because their soul
is hungry!
Recant! Confess your fault!
Renounce your writings-
perhaps you shall be spared.
I cannot but do as my
conscience dictates.
Admit your guilt!
I cannot but do as my
conscience dictates!
Then...you...shall...burn!
Then...I...shall...burn!
Burn! Burn! Burn!
William Tyndale you are charged
with heresy...
in that you have translated and
distributed
the Holy Scriptures in the
English language
which is in direct violation of
both state and Church.
You have denied the authority
of the one true church...
and are sentenced to be
executed...
by burning.
May God have mercy on your soul!
Lord... feed your sheep!
Lord...open the King of
England's eyes!
Open the King of England's eyes!
William's death seemed like a
terrible defeat.
But, within two years
his dying prayer was
wonderfully answered.
King Henry ordered that every
church in England
make a copy of the English
Bible available for public
reading.
Every church, father?
Every church!
You see, you and I can read
God's word now
because of the sacrifice that
William and others made for us.
Others like...
Grandfather?
Yes...Grandfather and other
brave people like them
who loved God's word!
Grandfather taught me...
"Everyone who hears God's words
and puts them into practice is
like a- "
...Wise man who built his house
upon the rock!
"The rain came down, the
streams rose,
"and the winds blew and beat
against that house.
"Yet, it did not fall
"because it had it's foundation
at the rock.
"But, everyone who hears these
words of mine
"and does not put them into
practice
"is like the foolish man who
built his house on the sand.
The rain came down..."
"If God spare my life, I will
cause a ploughboy
to know more scripture than the
average priest."